Compose Test API (#66)
JetBrains/kotlin-multiplatform-dev-docs: topics/compose/compose-test.md

[//]: # (title: Testing Compose UI)

UI testing in Compose Multiplatform is implemented using the same finders, assertions, actions, and matchers

> as the Jetpack Compose testing API. If you're not familiar with them, we highly recommend reading the [Jetpack Compose guide](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/testing)

Author: Yeah, I think we were just too cautious here. You need to read the guide to understand what's going on.

               dependencies {
                  implementation("androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-junit4-android:1.5.4")
                  debugImplementation("androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-manifest:1.5.4")
               }
            }
           //...
         }
         //... 
      }
      ```
   2. Add the following line to the `android.defaultConfig` block:
      ```kotlin
      android {
         //...
         defaultConfig {
            //...
            testInstrumentationRunner = "androidx.test.runner.AndroidJUnitRunner"
         }
      }
      ```

Now you are ready to write and run common tests on any platform.

## Write and run common tests

In the `composeApp/src/commonTest/kotlin` directory, create a file named `ExampleTest.kt` and copy the following code into it:

```kotlin
import androidx.compose.material.*
import androidx.compose.runtime.*
import androidx.compose.ui.Modifier
import androidx.compose.ui.platform.testTag
import androidx.compose.ui.test.*
import kotlin.test.Test

class ExampleTest {

    @OptIn(ExperimentalTestApi::class)
    @Test
    fun myTest() = runComposeUiTest {
        // Declare the UI state that will be tested, calling your code as necessary

>         // Here we provide only static examples to demonstrate API calls

Reviewer: I don't think "static" is the right word here, but I'm not sure what is. Maybe "synthetic", or "mock"?

Author: "Mock" is perfect, I think, thank you!

and the [Test your multiplatform app](multiplatform-run-tests.md) tutorial.

## How Compose Multiplatform testing is different from Jetpack  

Compose Multiplatform test API does not rely on JUnit's `TestRule` class. Instead, you call the `runComposeUiTest` function and invoke
the test functions on the `ComposeUiTest` receiver.

JUnit-based API is available for desktop targets, however. See [Running JUnit-based tests with Compose for Desktop](#running-junit-based-tests-with-compose-for-desktop).

## Add the testing library to Gradle dependencies

To provide concrete examples, the instructions on this page follow the project structure generated by the
Kotlin Multiplatform Wizard. If you are adding tests to an existing project, you may have to change `composeApp` in paths
and commands to the name of the module you are testing (`shared`, for example).

Create the test source set:
1. Create a directory for the test source set: `composeApp/src/commonTest/kotlin`
2. In the `composeApp/build.gradle.kts` file, add the following dependencies:
   ```kotlin
   kotlin {
      //...
      sourceSets {
         // Add a variable for the desktopTest source set 

>          val desktopTest by getting

Reviewer: I don't think the comment here is necessary. This is the very basics of gradle.

      
               dependencies {
                  implementation("androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-junit4-android:1.5.4")
                  debugImplementation("androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-manifest:1.5.4")
               }
            }
           //...
         }
         //... 
      }
      ```
   2. Add the following line to the `android.defaultConfig` block:
      ```kotlin
      android {
         //...
         defaultConfig {
            //...
            testInstrumentationRunner = "androidx.test.runner.AndroidJUnitRunner"
         }
      }
      ```

Now you are ready to write and run common tests on any platform.

## Write and run common tests

In the `composeApp/src/commonTest/kotlin` directory, create a file named `ExampleTest.kt` and copy the following code into it:

```kotlin
import androidx.compose.material.*
import androidx.compose.runtime.*
import androidx.compose.ui.Modifier
import androidx.compose.ui.platform.testTag
import androidx.compose.ui.test.*
import kotlin.test.Test

class ExampleTest {

    @OptIn(ExperimentalTestApi::class)
    @Test
    fun myTest() = runComposeUiTest {
        // Declares a mock UI to demonstrate API calls

>         // Add your own declarations as needed

Reviewer: Maybe "replace with" instead of "add"?

        setContent {
            var text by remember { mutableStateOf("Hello") }
            Text(
                text = text,
                modifier = Modifier.testTag("text")
            )
            Button(
                onClick = { text = "Compose" },
                modifier = Modifier.testTag("button")
            ) {
                Text("Click me")
            }
        }

>         // Describes assertions and actions with the declared UI which should succeed for the test to pass

Reviewer: It doesn't "describe" them; it's just "The assertions and actions that test the UI declared above".

Author: The code after the comment does something, [our guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mUuxK4xwzs3jtDGoJ5_zwYLaSEl13g_SuhODdFuh2Dc/edit#heading=h.sckrree1jn5r) ask to try and communicate what that is. Tried rephrasing here.

Reviewer: I'm not against communicating what the code does. I'm just saying we should do it directly. Phrases like "Describes" and "Calls API methods" are redundant. If you must use a verb, it can be "Test". Maybe "Test the UI declared above via actions and assertions"?

        onNodeWithTag("text").assertTextEquals("Hello")
        onNodeWithTag("button").performClick()
        onNodeWithTag("text").assertTextEquals("Compose")
    }
}
```

To run tests:

<tabs>
<tab title="iOS Simulator">

Click the green run icon in the gutter next to the `myTest()` function and choose **Run...&nbsp;|&nbsp;iosSimulatorArm64**.

Or, run the following command in the terminal:

```shell
./gradlew :composeApp:iosSimulatorArm64Test
```

</tab>
<tab title="Android Emulator">

Run this command:
```shell
./gradlew :composeApp:connectedAndroidTest
```

> Currently, you cannot run common Compose Multiplatform tests on an Android emulator using Android Studio or Fleet GUI

Reviewer: "in the Android Emulator"

> Currently, you cannot run common Compose Multiplatform tests on an Android emulator using Android Studio or Fleet GUI

Reviewer: What's "Fleet GUI"?

Author: I worded this awkwardly and also was sure for some reason that Fleet works exactly the same here. Made a more general statement.

Reviewer: Sorry, I didn't mean to remove it altogether... I think mentioning the two IDEs by name is fine. I was just wondering why "Fleet GUI" and not just "Fleet".

[//]: # (title: Testing Compose UI)

> This page describes the new UI testing API available since Compose Multiplatform 1.6.0-beta01.
>
{type="note"}

UI testing in Compose Multiplatform is implemented using the same finders, assertions, actions, and matchers
as the Jetpack Compose testing API. If you're not familiar with them, we highly recommend reading the [Jetpack Compose guide](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/compose/testing)
before you continue with this article.

> The API is [Experimental](supported-platforms.md#core-kotlin-multiplatform-technology-stability-levels).
> It may change in the future.
>
{type="warning"}

## How Compose Multiplatform testing is different from Jetpack Compose

Compose Multiplatform test API does not rely on JUnit's `TestRule` class. Instead, you call the `runComposeUiTest` function and invoke
the test functions on the `ComposeUiTest` receiver.

> JUnit-based API is available for desktop targets, however. See [Running JUnit-based tests with Compose Multiplatform for Desktop](#running-junit-based-tests-with-compose-multiplatform-for-desktop).

Reviewer 2: JUnit-based API is available for desktop targets only.

IDK why, but it sounds more natural for me in terms of docs.

Author: My argument is continuity: I implicitly state that there is no JUnit-based API in the first paragraph, and the current second paragraph is the most compact way I saw to 1) contradict that and 2) describe a particular exception to the rule.

But I do state that it's desktop only in the actual section about it.

> JUnit-based API is available for desktop targets, however. See [Running JUnit-based tests with Compose Multiplatform for Desktop](#running-junit-based-tests-with-compose-multiplatform-for-desktop).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, JUnit-based API is available for [desktop targets](#running-junit-based-tests-with-compose-multiplatform-for-desktop).
```

## Writing and running tests with Compose Multiplatform

First, add the source set for tests and necessary dependencies to the module. Then, write and run the example test
and try to customize it.

### Create the test source set and add the testing library to dependencies

To provide concrete examples, the instructions on this page follow the project structure generated by the

> [Kotlin Multiplatform Wizard](https://kmp.jetbrains.com/). If you are adding tests to an existing project, you may have

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Kotlin Multiplatform wizard](https://kmp.jetbrains.com/). If you are adding tests to an existing project, you may have
```

> to change `composeApp` in paths and commands to the name of the module you are testing (`shared`, for example).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to replace `composeApp` in paths and commands with the module name you are testing (`shared`, for example).
```

Create a common test source set and add necessary dependencies:

> 1. Create a directory for the common test source set: `composeApp/src/commonTest/kotlin`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create a directory for the common test source set: `composeApp/src/commonTest/kotlin`.
```

2. In the `composeApp/build.gradle.kts` file, add the following dependencies:

    ```kotlin
    kotlin {
        //...
        sourceSets { 
            val desktopTest by getting
   
            // Adds common test dependencies
            commonTest.dependencies {
                implementation(kotlin("test"))
            
                @OptIn(org.jetbrains.compose.ExperimentalComposeLibrary::class)
                implementation(compose.uiTest)
            }
   
            // Adds the desktop test dependency
            desktopTest.dependencies { 
                implementation(compose.desktop.currentOs)
            }
        }
    }
    ```

> 3. If you need to run instrumented (emulator) tests for Android, you have to amend your Gradle configuration further:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. If you need to run instrumented (emulator) tests for Android, amend your Gradle configuration further:
```

>    1. Add the following code to the `androidTarget` block, and follow IDE's suggestions to add missing imports:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   1. Add the following code to the `androidTarget` block and follow IDE's suggestions to add missing imports:
```

      ```kotlin
      kotlin {
          //...
          androidTarget { 
              @OptIn(ExperimentalKotlinGradlePluginApi::class)
              instrumentedTestVariant { 
                  sourceSetTree.set(KotlinSourceSetTree.test)
      
                  dependencies {
                      implementation("androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-junit4-android:1.5.4")
                      debugImplementation("androidx.compose.ui:ui-test-manifest:1.5.4")
                  }
              }
              //...
          }
          //... 
      }
      ```

>    2. Add the following line to the `android.defaultConfig` block:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   2. Add the following line to the `android.defaultConfig {}` block:
```

      ```kotlin
      android {
          //...
          defaultConfig {
              //...
              testInstrumentationRunner = "androidx.test.runner.AndroidJUnitRunner"
          }
      }
      ```

> Now you are ready to write and run common tests for a Compose Multiplatform UI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, you are ready to write and run common tests for the Compose Multiplatform UI.
```

```kotlin
import androidx.compose.material.*
import androidx.compose.runtime.*
import androidx.compose.ui.Modifier
import androidx.compose.ui.platform.testTag
import androidx.compose.ui.test.*
import kotlin.test.Test

class ExampleTest {

    @OptIn(ExperimentalTestApi::class)
    @Test
    fun myTest() = runComposeUiTest {
        // Declares a mock UI to demonstrate API calls
        //
        // Replace with your own declarations to test the code of your project
        setContent {
            var text by remember { mutableStateOf("Hello") }
            Text(
                text = text,
                modifier = Modifier.testTag("text")
            )
            Button(
                onClick = { text = "Compose" },
                modifier = Modifier.testTag("button")
            ) {
                Text("Click me")
            }
        }

        // Tests the declared UI with assertions and actions of the Compose Multiplatform testing API
        onNodeWithTag("text").assertTextEquals("Hello")
        onNodeWithTag("button").performClick()
        onNodeWithTag("text").assertTextEquals("Compose")
    }
}
```

To run tests:

<tabs>

> <tab title="iOS Simulator">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<tab title="iOS simulator">
```

Author: I tried to avoid using "emulator" for Android and "simulator" for iOS to describe the same thing. At the same time, I mentioned Simulator as the most recognizable option for the Apple ecosystem.

In Android Studio and Fleet, you can click the green run icon in the gutter next to the `myTest()` function, choose
**Run...** and the iOS target for the test.

Or, run the following command in the terminal:

```shell
./gradlew :composeApp:iosSimulatorArm64Test
```

</tab>

> <tab title="Android Emulator">

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<tab title="Android emulator">
```

Author: As with iOS Simulator, I'm referring to the product rather than the kind of product. I think it leads to less confusion overall.

> Run this command:

Reviewer 2: in the terminal

```shell
./gradlew :composeApp:connectedAndroidTest
```

Currently, you cannot run common Compose Multiplatform tests using `android (local)` test configurations, so gutter icons in

> Android Studio, for example, won't be helpful.

Reviewer 2: Is this problem only in AS?
Do we need "for example"?

Author: It's a problem in general with "local" Android tests, which use only an approximation of a device. But AS is the main tool we're working with, so I thought it's important to note what it looks like there.

</tab>
<tab title="Desktop">

Click the green run icon in the gutter next to the `myTest()` function and choose **Run...&nbsp;|&nbsp;desktop**.

Or, run the following command in the terminal:

```shell
./gradlew :composeApp:desktopTest
```

</tab>
<tab title="Wasm (headless browser)">

> Run this command:

Reviewer 2: in the terminal

```shell
./gradlew :composeApp:wasmJsTest
```

</tab>
</tabs>

> ### Running JUnit-based tests with Compose Multiplatform for Desktop

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Running JUnit-based tests with Compose Multiplatform for desktop
```

JUnit-based test API is only available for desktop Compose Multiplatform targets.

To provide concrete examples, the instructions on this page follow the project structure generated by the

> Kotlin Multiplatform Wizard. If you are adding tests to an existing project, you may have to change `composeApp` in paths

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kotlin Multiplatform wizard. If you are adding tests to an existing project, you may have to replace `composeApp` in paths
```

> and commands to the name of the module you are testing (`shared`, for example).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and commands with the module name you are testing (`shared`, for example).
```

> Create the test source set and add necessary dependencies:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create the test source set and add the necessary dependencies:
```

> 1. Create a directory for tests: `composeApp/src/desktopTest/kotlin`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Create a directory for tests: `composeApp/src/desktopTest/kotlin`.
```

> 1. Create a directory for tests: `composeApp/src/desktopTest/kotlin`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a directory for tests: `composeApp/src/desktopTest/kotlin`.
```

2. In the `composeApp/build.gradle.kts` file, add the following dependencies:

   ```kotlin
   kotlin { 
       //...
       sourceSets { 
           //...
           val desktopTest by getting { 
               dependencies {
                   implementation(compose.desktop.uiTestJUnit4)
                   implementation(compose.desktop.currentOs)
               }
           }
       }
   }
   ```

> 3. Now, create a test file called `ExampleTest.kt`, and copy the following code into it:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Create a test file called `ExampleTest.kt` and copy the following code into it:
```

    import androidx.compose.ui.test.junit4.createComposeRule
    import org.junit.Rule
    import org.junit.Test
    
    class ExampleTest {
        @get:Rule
        val rule = createComposeRule()
    
        @Test
        fun myTest(){
            // Declares a mock UI to demonstrate API calls
            //
            // Replace with your own declarations to test the code in your project
            rule.setContent {
                var text by remember { mutableStateOf("Hello") }
   
                Text(
                    text = text,
                    modifier = Modifier.testTag("text")
                )
                Button(
                    onClick = { text = "Compose" },
                    modifier = Modifier.testTag("button")
                ) {
                    Text("Click me")
                }
            }
    
            // Tests the declared UI with assertions and actions of the JUnit-based testing API
            rule.onNodeWithTag("text").assertTextEquals("Hello")
            rule.onNodeWithTag("button").performClick()
            rule.onNodeWithTag("text").assertTextEquals("Compose")
        }
    }
    ```

> 4. To run the test, click the run icon in the gutter next to the `myTest` function or run the following command in the terminal:

Reviewer 2: myTest()

   ```shell
   ./gradlew desktopTest
   ```

## What's next

> For a general overview of testing in a Kotlin Multiplatform project, see [Understand basic project structure](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/multiplatform-discover-project.html#integration-with-tests)

Reviewer 2: Maybe list here?

* One
* Two

Author: Yeah. I kept putting off having to come up with an intro to this list, and now I did.
